Bernardo, what were the keys
by which you achieved that idealist,
that when he was born, so you
told us, it was an ultra competitive
market, with hundreds of
portals at that time, and
you spent a few years of that
situation to be the leaders in
a market in which I now think
you have a very high market
share and having created huge
barriers to entry and having
created a potent business?
Well, these things seem very fast,
but the idealist is 18 years old.
If I were a baby, I would be going
to college.
These things do not happen quickly.
It was necessary to build equipment,
create operations, sell, collect, and
go through the biggest real estate crisis
in Spain’s history.
I think it sounds easy, but I think
it’s the cluster of a lot of things,
especially the perseverance
of those who have been there
in the day to day.
I think it’s one of the fundamental
aspects in the projects, but
I would point out four or five
things.
One is that we chose a big and
important problem to
solve that affects many people.
Everyone is looking for
a home at some point or another
and makes rental or purchase.
That is undeniable, but the rest,
your competitors, were seeking
to solve the same problem.
Here comes the rest of the variables.
I think it’s important to get
a successful project, identify
these things.
Then have a competitive technical advantage,
that is, that you do something different
and better than the rest of the
competition.
In this case, it is the quality of
information.
We made a lot of effort to make
the ads true and correspond
to a single property.
This gave us a very important
quality feeling that distinguished
us from the competition.
How do you control it?
Because on a platform or in
a marketplace where the content
is raised by housing offerers.
How do you do to heal that
content?
In the idealist case, the
ads, the problems that there were
is that as the exclusive
transaction was less than 1%
in Spain, it was very common to
find many ads for the same property.
For it was sold by the portier,
four agencies, the private, the mother-
in-law who devoted himself to
it in free time.
Then there were 5 or 6 ads for
the same property, 5 or 6 prices,
5 or 6 photos, 5 or 6 sets of features.
We wanted to structure that information
very well, clean the photos, make
them visually more aesthetic and
establish a rule that was very important
for us, which was the unity
between the ad and the property,
so that there was only one
ad per property in idealist,
so that it did not spot
the search engine and
cleaned the dynamics of the
search engine a little.
The expression was one of many...
Did you tell us two?
Not, but elements within the second,
differentiating elements.
Idealist was the quality of the
information, the user experience,
we were a reporter, we established
a fixed and defined criterion
of what were the neighborhoods,
of the zones, because the good
zones tend to be very large
and the bad very small.
Then we tried to have very defined
criteria for the allocation
of zones, map search when
making selections, the
system of alerts, alerts.
There were a lot of things that
worked very well and that represented
an important differential element
with respect to competition
and that after many years
I think they have achieved
what idealists today.
I would say, above all, the
perseverance and commitment of
a long time.
These technical competitive advantages
are initially true that they can
generate some attraction for you,
but then they are comfortably
made because anyone can copy
it for you.
We have studied Power MBA and we
have analyzed very deeply
the network effect or network economies
seeing as the first companies in
an environment, in a market
like the one we talked about,
300 platforms, 300 marketplaces
in the real estate sector,
real estate portals
competing.
The first ones that gain attraction,
the value is multiplied due to the
network effect and makes it generate
huge entry barriers with respect
to the rest because the small
can no longer provide the same value
because they can not add neither
the same offer nor the same
return, they are left out of
play.
How do these entrance barriers affect
in this case in the idealist case?
I believe that in the idealist case
there are dynamics of what are called
network externalities that play
in their favor.
As more ads are placed, more
attractive and as more attractive
more ads are placed.
It is a virtuous circle in this
case that they usually have
these companies declasified or
all that needs viral content
that users create.
Then in idealist we had that luck
of generating that virtuous
wheel and that creates a
very strong entry barriers because
for it to have Google, it
has Facebook, it has 20.
The more people there are, the more attractive
you are and the more attractive you are, the
more people come to you.
So we continue to grow and it’s very
difficult for one who is
starting to be able to compete with
you unless you have a very
strong competitive advantage that
people are worth making that transaction
cost of switching network where
you sacrifice network externality
for an added value that
the new technology may give
you whatever it is.
We’ve seen how people have moved
from Friendster to Facebook, from
Friendster to MySpace, from
MySpace to Facebook and have been
sacrificing that network externality
because the new technology gave
them enough value to sacrifice
the previous value.
Did you move from MySpace to Facebook
at a time when you had not yet
reached that critical mass
you have now?
MySpace had it, and Twente
had it.
In the case of Twente, that is very clear.
He lost her on Facebook.
If there are any user transfers.
But from Twente to Facebook it wasn’
t for a technical issue, it was for
a pure networking issue because I thought,
you had friends in other sites around
the world, the network was bigger
and the network in that case what made
Facebook outperform Twente was
not a technical issue, sure there
was, but basically it was
that, it was that networking
economy in particular.
I think it was a combination.
Facebook began to offer services
that Twente cost to give and Telefónica
changed the focus from leaving to be a social
network to being a virtual mobile
operator and then there they promoted
themselves.
I think you are right, it may not be
just a technical advantage and a network
with a much higher value, it is
a more international value network.
In the case of Twente we had 90%
of the market share of the guys,
there was no net larger than
Twente in that demography and
they liked being where the older
brothers and parents were not.
I think it was a combination of
things, but the technical part
had the mobile app that worked
very well, the guys were increasingly
on mobile.
I think it was a combination that
stopped investing technically
in Twente and eventually made
the Facebook offer more complete,
by network size but also by
many technical functionalities,
only in that transition to
the mobile that was occurring
at that time.